content/phonetics/components.md, before:

# Components

## Infrastructure

The system uses a two-instance Elasticsearch architecture on Pitt CRC infrastructure:

| Component | Location | Purpose |
|-----------|----------|---------|
| Production Elasticsearch | VM, /ix3 (flash) | Live indices, query serving |
| Staging Elasticsearch | Slurm worker, local NVMe scratch | Index building, embedding enrichment |
| Authority files | /ix1 (bulk) | Source datasets |
| Snapshots | /ix1 (bulk) | Transfer mechanism, backup |
| Processing scripts | /ix1 (bulk) | Ingestion, embedding generation |

The staging instance runs on local NVMe scratch storage (`$SLURM_SCRATCH`, ~870GB available), providing fast I/O for indexing operations while protecting the production VM from workload spikes. Snapshots transfer completed indices from staging to production via the shared /ix1 filesystem.

## Elasticsearch Indices

### Places Index

Core gazetteer records with geometry and metadata. Each place references toponyms by their `name@lang` identifiers.

```json
{
  "place_id": "gn:2643743",
  "namespace": "gn",
  "label": "London",
  "toponyms": ["London@en", "Londra@it", "Londres@fr", "Лондон@ru"],
  "ccodes": ["GB"],
  "locations": [{
    "geometry": { "type": "Point", "coordinates": [-0.1276, 51.5074] },
    "rep_point": { "lon": -0.1276, "lat": 51.5074 }
  }],
  "types": [{ "identifier": "P", "label": "geonames", "sourceLabel": "PPL" }],
  "relations": [{ "relationType": "sameAs", "relationTo": "wd:Q84", "certainty": 1.0 }]
}
```

### Toponyms Index

Unique name@language combinations with phonetic data. Each toponym appears **once** in this index, regardless of how many places share it:

- Unique `name@lang` identifier (e.g., "London@en")
- IPA transcription (where available)
- Siamese BiLSTM phonetic embedding (128 dimensions)
- Completion suggester for type-ahead

```json
{
  "toponym_id": "London@en",
  "name": "London",
  "name_lower": "london",
  "lang": "en",
  "ipa": "ˈlʌndən",
  "embedding_bilstm": [0.23, -0.15, ...],
  "suggest": { "input": ["London"], "contexts": { "lang": ["en"] } }
}
```

This design ensures:

- **Embedding efficiency**: Each unique toponym is embedded once, not once per place
- **Storage optimisation**: ~80M unique toponyms vs potentially hundreds of millions of place-toponym pairs
- **Query simplicity**: Search the toponyms index, then join to places

## Processing Components

### IPA Generation (Epitran)

[Epitran](https://github.com/dmort27/epitran) provides grapheme-to-phoneme conversion for 90+ languages. IPA transcriptions are generated during toponym ingestion.

Supported language mappings are defined in the processing scripts, covering major European, Asian, and Middle Eastern languages. Unsupported languages fall back to transliteration or remain without IPA.

### Phonetic Embeddings (Siamese BiLSTM)

A character-level bidirectional LSTM, trained using a Siamese architecture, generates 128-dimensional dense vectors from toponym text. The Siamese training approach uses pairs (or triplets) of toponyms with shared weights to learn phonetic similarity directly.

The model:

- Processes character sequences directly (no IPA required)
- Learns phonetic similarity from positive/negative pairs
- Generalises across scripts and languages
- Enables approximate nearest neighbour search via Elasticsearch kNN

The Siamese BiLSTM approach was chosen over rule-based alternatives (e.g., PanPhon feature vectors) because it handles scripts and languages without explicit phonological rules, and learns what "sounds similar" from real-world toponym equivalences.

### Completion Suggester

The `suggest` field provides type-ahead autocomplete functionality, with language context for filtering suggestions by user locale.

Commit message:

Revise documentation to clarify ephemeral staging instance lifecycle, cost efficiency, and snapshot persistence

content/phonetics/components.md, after:

# Components

## Infrastructure

The system uses a two-instance Elasticsearch architecture on Pitt CRC infrastructure:

| Component | Location | Purpose |
|-----------|----------|---------|
| Production Elasticsearch | VM, /ix3 (flash) | Live indices, query serving |
| Staging Elasticsearch | Slurm worker, local NVMe scratch | Index building, embedding enrichment |
| Authority files | /ix1 (bulk) | Source datasets |
| Snapshots | /ix1 (bulk) | Transfer mechanism, backup |
| Processing scripts | /ix1 (bulk) | Ingestion, embedding generation |

The staging instance is **ephemeral**, spun up only for the duration of indexing jobs. It runs on local NVMe scratch storage (`$SLURM_SCRATCH`, ~870GB available), providing fast I/O for indexing operations. When the Slurm job completes, the staging instance and its local data are automatically cleaned up. Snapshots written to the shared /ix1 filesystem persist the completed indices for transfer to production.

## Elasticsearch Indices

### Places Index

Core gazetteer records with geometry and metadata. Each place references toponyms by their `name@lang` identifiers.

```json
{
  "place_id": "gn:2643743",
  "namespace": "gn",
  "label": "London",
  "toponyms": ["London@en", "Londra@it", "Londres@fr", "Лондон@ru"],
  "ccodes": ["GB"],
  "locations": [{
    "geometry": { "type": "Point", "coordinates": [-0.1276, 51.5074] },
    "rep_point": { "lon": -0.1276, "lat": 51.5074 }
  }],
  "types": [{ "identifier": "P", "label": "geonames", "sourceLabel": "PPL" }],
  "relations": [{ "relationType": "sameAs", "relationTo": "wd:Q84", "certainty": 1.0 }]
}
```

### Toponyms Index

Unique name@language combinations with phonetic data. Each toponym appears **once** in this index, regardless of how many places share it:

- Unique `name@lang` identifier (e.g., "London@en")
- IPA transcription (where available)
- Siamese BiLSTM phonetic embedding (128 dimensions)
- Completion suggester for type-ahead

```json
{
  "toponym_id": "London@en",
  "name": "London",
  "name_lower": "london",
  "lang": "en",
  "ipa": "ˈlʌndən",
  "embedding_bilstm": [0.23, -0.15, ...],
  "suggest": { "input": ["London"], "contexts": { "lang": ["en"] } }
}
```

This design ensures:

- **Embedding efficiency**: Each unique toponym is embedded once, not once per place
- **Storage optimisation**: ~80M unique toponyms vs potentially hundreds of millions of place-toponym pairs
- **Query simplicity**: Search the toponyms index, then join to places

## Processing Components

### IPA Generation (Epitran)

[Epitran](https://github.com/dmort27/epitran) provides grapheme-to-phoneme conversion for 90+ languages. IPA transcriptions are generated during toponym ingestion.

Supported language mappings are defined in the processing scripts, covering major European, Asian, and Middle Eastern languages. Unsupported languages fall back to transliteration or remain without IPA.

### Phonetic Embeddings (Siamese BiLSTM)

A character-level bidirectional LSTM, trained using a Siamese architecture, generates 128-dimensional dense vectors from toponym text. The Siamese training approach uses pairs (or triplets) of toponyms with shared weights to learn phonetic similarity directly.

The model:

- Processes character sequences directly (no IPA required)
- Learns phonetic similarity from positive/negative pairs
- Generalises across scripts and languages
- Enables approximate nearest neighbour search via Elasticsearch kNN

The Siamese BiLSTM approach was chosen over rule-based alternatives (e.g., PanPhon feature vectors) because it handles scripts and languages without explicit phonological rules, and learns what "sounds similar" from real-world toponym equivalences.

### Completion Suggester

The `suggest` field provides type-ahead autocomplete functionality, with language context for filtering suggestions by user locale.
